Small note about software watchdogs (#297)
memfault/memfault-docs: docs/mcu/watchdogs.mdx

---
id: watchdogs
title: Watchdog Instrumentation
sidebar_label: Watchdog Instrumentation
---

import IntegrationCompletePrerequisite from "@site/src/pages/_partials/_integration-complete-prerequisite.mdx";
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

<IntegrationCompletePrerequisite />

This document describes the necessary integration details to capture coredumps
when a Watchdog occurs.

An example of a captured Watchdog crash below:

![](/img/docs/mcu/watchdog-example.png)

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps a section that calls out that we assume someone has already configured a watchdog timer and you could link the background article here

Author: good call!

## Watchdogs

> When using the Memfault SDK, it's important to ensure we instrument the watchdog
> timers, so a coredump will be captured when the watchdog trips.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the Memfault SDK, we recommend instrumenting the watchdog timer so a coredump will be captured when the watchdog trips.
```

:::info

Some background and general theory around watchdog timers in microcontrollers
can be found in this article:

<https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/firmware-watchdog-best-practices>

:::

The fundamental technique is to use Memfault's
[Watchdog interrupt handler](https://github.com/memfault/memfault-firmware-sdk/blob/0.33.1/components/panics/src/memfault_fault_handling_arm.c#L286)
to trap the interrupt when the watchdog fires- this provides the best backtrace
result, since it uses the Memfault interrupt shim.

To use it, make sure that the `MEMFAULT_EXC_HANDLER_WATCHDOG` Memfault SDK
config is set to the name of the Watchdog interrupt handler registered in your
interrupt vector table (this config is usually set in the
`memfault_platform_config.h` header file), and there is no competing
implementation.

<!-- ```c

> void WDOG1_IRQHandler(void) {

Reviewer: slightly sub-optimal because then the interupt winds up in the backtrace -- better if MEMFAULT_EXC_HANDLER_WATCHDOG is wired up directly

memfault_platform_coredump_save_begin is a better location to optionally pat the watchdog

  // optionally, do one last feed here of the hardware watchdog in case more
  // time is needed to ensure the coredump save can finish

  // trigger a Memfault software watchdog
  MEMFAULT_SOFTWARE_WATCHDOG();
}
``` -->

Depending on the particular chip, there's often a "warning" threshold that can
be configured into the watchdog, which will trigger an interrupt some period
before the watchdog reset occurs.

For example, on the NXP Rt1021 chip (from the
[RT1020 Refernce Manual](https://www.mouser.com/pdfDocs/NXP_RT1020_RM.pdf)):

![](/img/docs/mcu/watchdog-interrupt-rt1020.png)

If available, be sure to set up the warning threshold at a sufficiently long
timeout for the coredump saving to have enough time to finish (for example, if

> there are long flash page erase times that need to be accounted for).

Reviewer: Perhaps just pick call out a concrete number here (i.e MEMFAULT_WATCHDOG_SW_TIMEOUT_SECS) -- "We typically recommend 10 seconds"

If the hardware watchdog does not permit a "warning" threshold of sufficient
time, it may instead make sense to set the hardware watchdog to a very long
period, and use a timer peripheral interrupt to trigger the Memfault software
watchdog.

## Sample Integrations

Memfault provides several example implementations of software watchdogs, which
can be used as-is or as a reference for your own implementation:

> <!-- TODO -->

Reviewer: Love it 👍
